Louise Taper called me and told me you'd be in New York at the Swan Hill and you'd look me up.
Tell me a little bit, how do you judge Louise as a collector of Lincoln?
Louise is probably the foremost woman collecting Lincoln and one of the foremost collectors of Lincoln.
and is probably the foremost woman collector of lincoln of all time wow is she a tough lady no she's extremely generous she's very bright and she can make up her mind in a hurry and she has a husband who is really a co-collector with her who encourages her well he seems to have come to it by her enthusiasm she has but he's
he's got the collector's instinct for other things so that he understands her yeah and she has a fantastic collection and she's built it intelligently and that everything she buys fits into whatever else she has it isn't random purchases it's to round out the story her material on booth she has the certainly the greatest private collection of material on mary lincoln
She's done a superb job and a very intelligent job.
But it seems to me she's very competitive, though.
I mean, if it's something she wants.
Well, every collector is competitive.
If you aren't,
You don't collect.
I said to her, I said, has there ever been anything that you really wanted that you didn't get?
And she said, what an interesting question.
And he says, no.
No.
I mean, sure, there have been things that have gone, you know, gone through the roof where the price is outrageous and she's not foolish.
But if she wants something, she's willing to go for it and stretch a bit.
And she has got a, she does her research.
She is not playing by ear.
She can read the notes.
She studies the subject.
She's not an accumulator.
There are a lot of people who buy just to have it.
She buys to have and to study it.
And she loves the books.
They're part of her family.
She said an interesting thing to me, like she's within five letters of catching up with other collectors like Barrett, for instance.
She seems to have set as models for herself the achievement.
She's for Oliver Barrett, you know, the fellow that... Oh, I bought 80% of the Barrett's sale.
I should know about it.
I was the biggest buyer in that sale.
Really?
Did that surprise you that that collection could broken up?
The Barrett collection?
Yeah.
I offered to buy the collection.
And I offered more than a Bronte auction.
They thought they would get more at auction.
And what did you want to do with it?
I would have broken it up.
I'll talk to you after the sale.
We're going to go back.
Okay, go on.
Okay, and I'll give you a call.
Okay, can I be fired?
I just wonder how you feel right now, Kevin.
I feel very happy about the fact that this world was a big success.
Besides the fact that it brought in a lot of money, apparently, it created a lot of business.
And a lot of people, one of the things I cared about, a lot of people got books that they wanted to own.
This lady who bought the features powder plant.
I said, are you selling this?
She said, oh no, it's not what those would mean.
That was a nice answer.
Also, yeah, she said that.
Also, it's nice for this one house.
I mean, they put a lot of work at Upway into this, and it's been a happy sale for them.
in terms of their 50th anniversary.
So everybody's happy all around.
How do you feel about seeing these friends of yours?
Looking at the books, you know, where you can see them all in one glance, I said to George, I said, with strong temptation, I said,
But once the diaries pass, I'm very happy and I'm very glad that they're going back in circulation.
That meant a lot to me.
I have a lot of stories here today which book dealers do.
For example, John Schiller bought me the Swinburne, I don't know if you noticed it, at an auction in London years ago.
There's a lot of interesting stuff.
Horowitz, who bought it today,
I turned around, and when I told him that, he said I would be underbitter at that auction in 1972.
That's a long time ago.
How long have you been collecting this book?
Since the middle 50s.
So what does that make it?
Almost 40 years.
Was the decision to step one to sell the books?
No, the time it arrived.
I'm getting old.
I'm 74 years old, and my kids and wife wouldn't know what to do with the books if they were stuck with them.
So I thought I'd better do it while I'm still alive.
And as I've said a couple times, I could use nobody in my retirement.
So we'll have some fun.
What was the general focus of the collection?
It became a completely Catholic collection.
I started out with the science fiction books.
Not only true science fiction, but Time Machine, Jekyll and Hyde, Kinetic and J.G., all of that kind of stuff.
Had a complete run of everything Edgar Rice Burroughs ever wrote.
I mean, gradually got into high spots.
You know, landmark books like Wealth of Nations and Origin of Species and Blackstone's Commentaries and others, you know, all of that sort of thing.
I was excited there.
A famous book there.
Boy, I'm trying on it.
There are two I missed out on.
I never got to in Austin.
Every time I was ready to spend what it cost for something like Pride and Prejudice, the price had gone three notches beyond what I was...
A Tale of Two Cities, I never thought.
That also kept going ahead of me.
Now, I noticed a few of the things that you have that I have.
Now, I have a wonderful Uncle Tom's cabin, and I was really excited to be here.
Mine isn't wonderful.
Mine is a nice package.
I got mine out of a Cape Cod collection, really, for $500, believe it or not, from a dealer about five or six years ago.
You know, it's one of the great ones.
But again, it's a classic book.
I never had any one author except Burroughs.
I don't think.
Complete.
Now, why Burroughs?
Because Tarzan was my boy and the girl.
So I have everything that Burroughs ever rose.
Still have the stars to see.
No, no, no.
They're all here.
Three of them.
Three of them went yesterday afternoon.
But there's lots more.
There's lots more.
Look, there's 6,000 books here.
And they've auctioned, what, now $500, and $4,000, maybe another couple hundred.
There's over $5,000 books still in there.
I'm afraid that you picked swans.
Oh, that was interesting.
I always thought that 50s and Sotheby's were the classic.
And when Swan spoke to me, I said, look, what Andrew has said, I'm going to put you in the same category.
And he said, you're right.
He said, but that means that for us, your books will be a very important item.
He said, they'll do a good job for you, but it won't be nearly the significance to them with a multi-million dollar payment.
He said, for us, he said, it'll be a big deal.
We'll make it our 50th anniversary.
I'm happy for him.
What's really exciting about book collecting is that
This is about a million-dollar sale.
Over $2 million, I think.
And it's great for the book.
But now you talk about Christie's last fall, November, they sold the Gutenberg for $2 million, and that was not considered a lot.
What I'm saying in terms of books, the beauty of books is that one book can be $2 million and not a lot.
A library can be $1 million, and it's tremendous.
It's kind of a cute little thing.
So there's no misgivings?
No, no, no.
I'll be interested to see what happens with the rest of the books.
I mean, not so much in terms of money, but in terms of how they go, if people really want them, if there's a spirited bidding problem.
How did you enjoy the books?
Now, these were in Chicago.
We had a couple of books all over the house, but we had one room with stacks in it, you know?
And we had like four stacks, and you could walk between them.
And then I got a couple more stacks, and we had a walk like this to get between them.
And my wife was very glad to get it all out of there.
She was?
She had no pressure on you.
Well, I thought of the thing I told you.
I used to read catalogs in bed at night.
And I said, my gosh, here's a book I paid 50 bucks for, and this dealer wants $3,500.
And she had one answer.
No.
So she finally got her wish.
I got a collector by the name of DeCourcy Failed.
He died a number of years ago.
But he was a famous New York collector.
And he went into David Kirchenbaum, who's now 98, who I've interviewed for this question.
And he said, Dave, you've got to help me.
And my wife said, either you go or the books go.
And so they gave him to NYU.
They're all not NYU.
That's what I didn't want to do.
This is Dave.
1,000,242.
That's before 10% or after?
That's the hammer.
No, there's errors and there's mistakes.
That's the apparent hammer price.
That's the hammer price.
We may have posted somebody's bid wrong or something.
I hope you didn't post the potter's wrong.
Potters are probably... We'll be off by a couple hundred dollars.
How do you feel?
Thanks, Larry.
...to absolute auction, you have to put cash on the barrelhead with 10 days notice.
And David Combsville did 2.0, period.
So there was an auction price?
Where was the auction?
In a lawyer's office.
In LA?
Were you bidding?
I tried to put together money.
I wanted to put up two and a half million dollars.
Did Ricky bid, you know?
No.
Nobody bid.
There was one bid.
this isn't like i'm having lunch uh april 30th 1992 a lovely little italian restaurant on third avenue i stopped on my way home from the swan's tail and uh i'm meditating here i have my notebook but indulge me for a second
Bill Shitey spends close to $2 million for a 36-line Bible known as a Liverpool Bible, Gutenberg-type.
People say he stole it.
He got it for nothing.
Should have gone for much more than that.
That was in November, which is just four months ago.
Today, the 50th anniversary sale of Swan Galleries, I was talking to Mr. Epstein, who had...
Consigned all the books this one.
Hold on.
I'm halfway through my homemade linguine with baby cherry stones, beautiful shrimp and scallops, garlic and basil with a nice tomato sauce.
But anyway, before we thought, the parts.
So shoddy spent a $2 million for the Gutenberg 36-line battle.
It's 1.24 at hammer price, so another 10%.
Everybody just found it, and how wonderful this sale is for 500 books.
That's a tremendous success, and it's a little more than half what Chatty sends, and that's a disappointment.
Not a disappointment, but a bargain.
That's the beauty of books, I think, in a way.
is that the merits can be anything.
It can be $2 million for one book.
It can be a million and a quarter for 500 books.
But they're important and the people collect them and that they're precious to the people who buy them.
I'll tell you what really excites me about this sale is that I'm looking for a way out of the book.
When I even proposed this,
before even it was bought by Random House.
We were talking about Richard Manny, the new buyer, the new guy on the block, the mystery buyer, the anonymous buyer, the guy who had bought the Poe Tamerlane, and then later who bought the four folios of Shakespeare at the Garden Sale.
Well, now, as we speak today, the man is bankrupt.
He's being chased by his creditors, and he owes millions of dollars.
Not only has he sold his book collection, but his 700 paintings are now in jeopardy of being attached and sold as well.
And then, at today's sale, we have a woman, Joan Hill from California.
Nobody knew who the hell she was, and she dominated the sale.
If it's a million two, this gal easily spent two or three or four hundred thousand dollars.
I truly don't know.
Out of the woodwork.
And so people come and go.
The books go on.
When we started this book, the guy that was new and the kid on the block is now not only old, but gone.
We have a new one here who emerged today.
In fact, she emerged so quickly that she won't even be in the Maine Antiques Digest because the person who was reporting for that publication wasn't here.
And she did not even buy that heavily yesterday.
So Joan Hill arrives as a big player.
On the scene, Steve Massey was there giving her his card.
And Lou Weinstein comes over sucking up from Heritage Books.
Three saying, who is this guy but that
There's a line there, and Butch Cassidy says, who are these guys, Butch?
Who is she?
She's a new one.
She's a woman, which is nice.
I talked to Ralph Newman, incidentally, along Louise Tabler.
And yet, so, the new one who was supposed to be the new one is not only dead, but gone.
We have a new one, and yet the old one, who is discounted, who is Bill Shady, is not only there, but is preeminent.
Think about this somehow when you come to write that final chapter.
When you meditate and you indulge yourself in a few imponderables.
One of the imponderables is the people coming out of what to go on.
Thanks.
And that is Nick Out.
And here we are on 3rd Avenue at 81st in New York City.
I just listened to this thing.
I think I liked it.
And...
This is important.
I'm thinking now.
How do you end a book which in some respects is episodic and why you disdain the encyclopedic approach where we have this collector, that collector, this collector, that collector, and this collector.
Interesting.
You want a narrative.
You want a story.
You want to tell something that's interesting and which engages your reader.
And so you want a beginning and a middle and an end.
This is what we tell kids who are trying to write stories.
You have a beginning, and you fatten it up with a middle, and you fly out of there with an out, an end.
And I think why I'm so pleased today and why I just indulged myself in a sinfully expensive but just decidedly wonderful dinner.
Lunch, actually, because it's only 3.15 in the afternoon.
It's because I think I've got it.
I think I have it.
I think particularly when we come to the second half of the book, where we start with To Have and To Have No More, what we have there is a meditation on the 80s with particular focus on Haven Om War and a garden sale.
What we say is, reader, hey, reader, you missed something.
There was a sale in November of 1989, and it only got two paragraphs in the New York Times, two lousy little paragraphs, and you missed it.
Well, listen to me.
Sit with me.
I'm going to tell you what happened.
And what happened is astounding and fascinating and quite fascinating.
If you focus as a microcosm of the book world, the comings and the goings, and it really is endemic of what went on in the 80s.
And then we go on and we identify and we talk about our people and we go to Texas and we do our collective chapters, which I now foresee to be two.
And then we have a California chapter, which is kind of nice.
And then we have our aberration, which is Stephen Blumberg.
And then we have to find a way out.
And I think the way we find our way out is to have a chapter that combines both Richard Manning and the sale here today.
Epstein gave me a couple of quotes.
He said, give him a call.
I will give him a call, perhaps.
But I don't think it's necessary because I think I have him for 10 minutes on this tape that we're listening to right here.
and the kinds of things that he said are interesting, but not terribly revelatory.
I did like his perception, his sense, his sense that, gee, if I stay here long enough, I might just pack them up and take them with me.
And that does resonate, doesn't it, from the John Hill Burton story,
or the priest or the friar or whatever the hell it was that he was consigns his books to the sale and he's sitting there he's sitting there in the gallery and he is so overcome at the sight of these books of his which are being sold that he goes out and he masquerades as a military officer or whatever and he comes back and he starts buying books well that didn't happen today but what Mr. Epstein said
does recall that incident, I think.
And whether or not we introduce it here, whether or not we introduce it here, or whatever in the book remains to be seen.
The whole thing comes down to structure and how we're going to do it.
But I have to say for this tape, and I don't know if anybody besides myself is ever going to listen to it, but if you do, I've enjoyed this enormously.
It's been the defining moment of my professional life.
It's been quite wonderful.
And as we speak, I'm on 96th Street trying to get onto the FDR North.
As my friend Brian Higgins and I used to say, we were at that spot where I could take a right and go to Atlantic City and shoot crap or continue left and go home.
pick up the Triborough Bridge and go home.
And what I'm doing here is going home.
And the traffic seems to be picking up as well.
So now we're looking at the East River.
And there's, opposite with an A, I think, there is an appropriateness to the fact that this is the first audio meditation I've done for this book.
It's appropriate that I do it in New York City, where only God knows how many times I've come here over the last 10 years to give books A New Life at the Strand, either that or to research the book, which I'm now completing for independence.
In any case, New York is important to me.
I love this damn city.
As I speak to this, I am looking at wrecked cars that have been savaged, cannibalized, and left for it.
They're only dead by their bones.
They look like carcasses.
Not even carcasses.
The skeletons built in the Serengeti that have been devoured by the big cats.
and the bones are glistening in the sun.
I always have used my father, John Bazmanes, when he drove down there.
I think he came, if only to see these cars by the side of the road.
Well, I've enjoyed this.
This has been kind of fun, and perhaps it was therapeutic.
And if some listener at some point
and the future listens to this.
Well, it's been a ball.
It's 30 April, 1992.
If you're looking for a date, we may have identified it at the beginning of the tape.
I truly don't know.
And now I'm coming up on the exit 17, Triborough Bridge, Buckner Expressway, Grand Central Parkway, Toll Bridge, and let's go home, my friend.
We may get back to you presently, if not to Nick Bazmanes.
Out.
Let's also say that I started up this morning not particularly pleased that I was coming to New York for a variety of reasons.
One, that I would rather be home writing.
And I wasn't overly thrilled about coming down.
I was just listening to Peggy Lee, and this is my song on the radio.
And yet, coming to the fair today was kind of like getting a sense of the vital signs, feeling the pulse, looking in the pupils of the eye,
looking at the complexion feeling what's going on out there and taking a little bit of it and infusing it into the work in progress because you can't just sit down there in a goddamn hole and write the fucking book without you're from on the pulse of what's happening and I don't know what the next book will be and God willing this book will be good
and successful, and well received, and perhaps even make a statement that people 50 or 100 years from now might even want to pay attention to it.
We'll see.
I won't be around.
100 years from now, God willing, my children will be around.
But if not,
You know, maybe some grandchildren that I may or may not hear who knows.
But if people listen to tapes at some point in the future and they like my book, it always is what we have to say.
I think this was a pretty important, I think it was the defining name of the book.
Because what I've been working on all this time, I think now has a scope.
It has a scope and it has a shape.
It certainly has a beginning, and right now what I see is the end.
Thank you, and out.